---
layout: post
title: "Why AIP?"
date: 2014-03-05 20:46:05 -0700
comments: true
categories: 
published: false
---

AIP, or Autoimmune Protocol, is a set of diet and lifestyle changes that help cure a leaky gut and reverse autoimmune disease. I'm not going to bore you with cellular level details, but instead give you a general idea of the mechanics behind autoimmune diseases and AIP can help cure them. If you want the nitty gritty, scientific response to drop on your friends and family when they give you quizzical looks, please refer to [The Paleo Approach](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1936608391/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1936608391&linkCode=as2&tag=eatihorr-20) -- it’s fun arguing with science on your side, trust me.

<!-- more -->

Now, before we talk any further I need to convince you that a [leaky gut](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intestinal_permeability) is a necessary precursor to any autoimmune disease (and that without a leaky gut, autoimmune disease cannot happen). Luckily, scientists have begun researching exactly that. One group of scientists found that "increased intestinal permeability... is observed prior to disease and appears to be involved in disease pathogenesis"<sup>1</sup>. Another concluded that when the intercellular junctions are deregulated, autoimmune diseases can occur<sup>2</sup>. There is mounting evidence that leaky gut precedes all autoimmune diseases (there are still some autoimmune diseases for which this hasn’t been explicitly proven), and, more importantly, that autoimmune disease cannot happen if a leaky gut is not present. Therefore, helping our bodies fix our intestinal linings helps cure autoimmune disease<sup>3</sup>.

If you are still not convinced, I would suggest buying and reading [The Paleo Approach](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1936608391/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1936608391&linkCode=as2&tag=eatihorr-20). If you are still not convinced, I ask you to think for a second – do you really think that eating more whole foods, reducing sugar and high glycemic load foods, reducing preservatives, and increasing the nutrient density of your diet will not help your disease? I hope you intuitively believe that your body is capable of healing itself if given the opportunity. 

There are several main ways we can help our bodies heal. We can reduce foods that irritate the gut or are hard to digest, increase foods that are nutrient dense and easier to digest, and reduce stress. 

Now, there is an incredibly long list of foods that irritate the gut -- don't be alarmed. Some of these foods you might be able to introduce back into your diet after disease stabilizes. This list includes eggs, nuts, seeds, nightshades, alcohol, [gluten cross-reactive foods](http://www.thepaleomom.com/2013/03/gluten-cross-reactivity-update-how-your-body-can-still-think-youre-eating-gluten-even-after-giving-it-up.html), excessive fructose, as well as grains, legumes, dairy, sugar, vegetable oils, or any processed foods/chemical/nitrates/etc. Minimizing these foods will give your body a much needed break from fighting itself to give it a chance for healing. 

In order to heal, we want to give our body nutrient dense food. My personal favorite is beef liver. I literally feel happier just by eating beef liver. Usually, I eat liver (or other organ meats) about four times a week, or about 1lb every week. Some people don't like the taste and some will tell you to freeze it and take it like a pill. I disagree<sup>4</sup>. I used to dislike the taste of beef liver, I'll admit it, but it grew on me quickly. Now I look forward to my liver days, and often crave it on days that I don't get to eat any. The entire process of cooking and eating it brightens my day. 

Another important food to include is fish and shellfish (for DHA and EPA omega 3's). Prefer wild, oily fish (even canned is ok), but don’t let anyone tell you that farmed fish isn’t ok as well for those on a budget. Then of course vegetables -- green at every meal, colors elsewhere, eat the rainbow (not skittles). Buy vegetables you don’t know and google ways to make them delicious. We also want quality grass fed, pasture raised meats. Similarly, look for quality fats, coming from quality meats or use olive oil, coconut oil, or avocado oil. If grass fed or pasture raised meats are out of the question, favor leaner meats and supplement with health fats.

Stress reduction is probably the hardest to nail down and give general guidelines, which coincidentally makes it the hardest for those following the AIP protocol to really follow. I enjoy meditation and regular exercise to help manage my stress, and I always ensure I get at least 9 hours of sleep (sometimes I need more). Those with autoimmune disease tend to need more sleep than others. Feeling tired throughout the day is not normal -- get more sleep. A lot of the difficult comes from the fact that we are often disconnected from ourselves. It is this section that we really need to check in with how we’re feeling, disconnect from the fast paced world and enjoy our lives – it is harder than it sounds.

I know this is a large list. I know this seems impossible. It isn't. My goal is to provide you with the tools necessary to transform your life and gain some sense of control over whatever plagues you.

I am 21 years old -- I have followed the autoimmune protocol in college, while working full time, living in Vancouver and Italy, vacationing, and through personal crises. It is possible -- [follow me](https://twitter.com/EatingHorror) on twitter to find out.


(1) http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1856434/  

(2) http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22109896  

(3) I'm being brief. If you're interested in the specifics, check out [The Paleo Approach](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1936608391/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1936608391&linkCode=as2&tag=eatihorr-20)  

(4) I have no medical reason to disagree -- you can feel free to pop frozen liver pills of that sounds good to you.  


